  Of Englishe Dogges,
  _the diuersities, the names,_
  +the natures, and the properties.+

  A Short
  _Treatise written in latine_

  +by Iohannes Caius of late
  memorie, Doctor of Phisicke
  in the Uniuersitie
  of Cambridge,+

  +And newly drawne into Englishe
  by Abraham Fleming
  Student.+

  _Natura etiam in brutis vin
  ostendit suam._

  Scene and allowed.

  ¶ Imprinted at London

  +by Rychard Johnes, and are to be
  solde ouer against S. Sepulchres
  Church without Newgate.+
  1576.




¶ A Prosopopoicall speache _of the Booke._

  Some tell of starres th’influence straunge,
    Some tell of byrdes which flie in th’ayre,
  Some tell of beastes on land which raunge,
    Some tell of fishe in riuers fayre,
  Some tell of serpentes sundry sortes,
    Some tell of plantes the full effect,
  Of English dogges I sound reportes,
    Their names and natures I detect,
  My forhed is but baulde and bare:
    But yet my body’s beutifull,
  For pleasaunt flowres in me there are,
    And not so fyne as plentifull:
  And though my garden plot so greene,
    Of dogges receaue the trampling feete,
  Yet is it swept and kept full cleene,
    So that it yeelds a sauour sweete.

  _Ab. Fle._




DOCTISSIMO VIRO, ET

  Patrono suo singulari D. Perne, E-
  _liensis ecclesiæ Cathedralis dignissi-_
  mo Decano, Abrahamus Flemingus,
  ευδαιμονιαν.


Scripsit non multis abhinc annis (optime Patrone) et non impolitè
scripsit, vir omnibus optimarum literarum remis instructissimus, de
doctorum grege non malè meritus, tuæ dignitati familiaritatis nexu
coniunctissimus, clarissimum Cantabrigiensis academiæ lumen, gẽma,
et gloria, Johannes Caius, ad Conradum Gesnerum summum suum, hominem
peritissimum, indagatorem rerum reconditarum sagacissimum, pulcherrimaq.
historiarum naturalium panoplia exornatũ, epitomen de canibus
Britannicis non tam breuem quàm elegantem, et vtilem, epitomen inquam
variis variorum experimentorum argumentis concinnatam; in cuius
titulum cũ forte incidissem, et nouitate rei nonnihil delectarer,
interpretationem Anglicam aggressus sum. Postquam vero finem penso
imposuissem, repentina quædam de opusculi dedicatione cogitatio
oboriebatur tãdemque post multas multarum rerum iactationes,
beneficiorum tuorum (Ornatissime vir) vnica recordatio, instar
rutilantis stellæ, quæ radiorum splendore quaslibet caliginosas
teterrimæ obliuionis nebulas dissipat, et memoriæ serenitatem, plusquã
solarem, inducit, mihi illuxit; nec nõ officii ratio quæ funestissimis
insensæ fortunæ fulminibus conquassata, lacerata, et convulsa, penè
perierat, fractas vires multumq. debilitatas colligebat, pristinum
robur recuperauit, tandemque aliquando ex Lethea illa palude neruose
emergebat, atque eluctata est. Quã voraginẽ simulatque euaserat, sic
effloruit, adeoque increuit, vt vnamquamque animi mei cellulã in sui
ditionem atque imperii amplitudinem raperet. Nunc vero in contemplatione
meritorum tuorum versari non desino, quorum magnitudinem nescio an tam
tenui et leuidensi orationis filo possim circumscribere: Hoc, Ædepol,
me non mediocriter mouet, non leuiter torquet, non languide pungit. Est
præterea alia causa quæ mihi scrupulum injicit, et quodammodo exulcerat,
ingrati nempe animi suspicio a qua, tanquam ab aliqua Lernæa Hydra,
pedibus (vt aiunt) Achilleis semper fugi, et tamẽ valde pertimesco ne
officij mora et procrastinatio (vt ita dicam) obscænam securitatis labem
nomini meo inurat, eoque magis expauesco quod peruulgatum illud atque
decantatum poetæ carmen memoriæ occurrebat.

  Dedecus est semper sumere nilque dare.

Sed (Ornatissime vir) quemadmodũ metus illius mali me magnopere
affligebat atque fodicabat, ita spes alterius boni, nempe humanitatis
tuæ, qua cæteris multis interuallis præluxeris, erigit suffulcitque:
Ea etiam spes alma et opima iubet et hortatur aliquod quale quale sit,
officij specimen cum allacritate animi prodere. Hisce itaque
persuasionibus victus me morigerum præbui, absolutamque de canibus
Britannicis interpretationẽ Anglicam, tibi potissimum vtpote patrono
singulari, et vnico Mæcenati dedicandũ proposui: non quod tam ieiuno et
exili munere immensum meritorum tuorum mare metiri machiner, non quod
religiosas aures sacratasque, prophanæ paginæ explicatione obtundere
cupiam, nec quod nugatoriis friuolisque narrationibus te delectari
arbitrer, cum in diuinioribus excercitationibus totus sis: sed potius
(cedat fides dicto) quod insignis ille egregiusque liber alium artium,
et præcipuè medicæ facultatis princeps (qui hoc opusculum contexuit) ita
viguit dum vixerat adeoque inclaruit, vt haud scio (vt ingenué fatear
quod sentio) an post funera parem sibi superstitem reliquerit. Deinde
quod hunc libellum summo studio et industria elaboratum in transmarinas
regiones miserat, ad hominem omni literarum genere, et præsertim
occultarũ rerum cognitione, quæ intimis naturæ visceribus et medullis
insederat (O ingeniũ niueo lapillo dignũ) cuius difficultates
Laberyntheis anfractibus flexuosisque recessibus impeditas perscrutari
et iuuestigare (deus bone, quam ingẽs labor, quam infinitum opus,)
excultum, Conradum Gesnerum scriberet, qui tantam gratiam conciliauit vt
non solum amicissimo osculo exciperet, sed etiam stud lose lectitaret,
accuratè vteretur, inexhaustis denique viribus, tanquam perspicacissimus
draco vellus aureum, et oculis plusquam aquilinis custodiret, Postremo
quemadmodum hanc epitomen a viro verè docto ad virum summa nominis
celebritate decoratum scriptam fuisse accepimus, ita eandem ipsam (pro
titulo Britannico) Britãnico sermone, licet ineleganti, vsitata et
populari, ab esuriente Rhetore donatam, tuis (eruditissime vir) manibus
commendo vt tuo sub patrocino in has atque illas regionis nostræ partes
intrepide proficiscatur: obtestorque vt hunc libellum, humilem et
obscuram inscriptionem gerentem, argumentum nouum et antehæc non auditum
complectientem, ab omni tamen Sybaritica obscœnitate remotissimum, æqui
bonique consulas.


Tuæ dignitati deditissimus

  _Abrahamus_
  _Flemingus._




To the well disposed Reader.


As euery manifest effect proceedeth frõ som certain cause, so the
penning of this present abridgement (gentle and courteous reader) issued
from a speciall occasion. For Conradus Gesnerus, a man whiles he liued,
of incomparable knowledge, and manyfold experience, being neuer
satisfied with the sweete sappe of vnderstanding, requested _Iohannes
Caius_ a profound clarke and a rauennous deuourer of learning (to his
praise be it spoke though the language be somewhat homely) to write a
breuiary or short treatise of such dogges as were ingendred within the
borders of England: To the contentation of whose minde and the vtter
accomplishement of whose desire, _Caius_ spared no study, (for the
acquaintance which was betweene them, as it was confirmed by
continuaunce, and established vpon vnfainednes, so was it sealed with
vertue and honesty) withdrew himself from no labour, repined at no
paines, forsooke no trauaile, refused no indeuour, finally pretermitted
no opportunity or circumstaunce which seemed pertinent and requisite to
the performance of this litle libell. In the whole discourse wherof, the
booke, to consider the substaunce, being but a pamphlet or skantling,
the argument not so fyne and affected, and yet the doctrine very
profitable and necessarye, he vseth such a smoothe and comely style, and
tyeth his inuention to such methodicall and orderly proceedings, as the
elegantnes and neatnesse of his Latine phrase, (being pure, perfect,
and vn mingled) maketh the matter which of it selfe is very base and
clubbishe, to appeare (shall I say tollerable) nay rather commendable
and effectuall. The sundry sortes of Englishe dogges he discouereth so
euidently, their natures he rippeth vp so apparantly, their manners he
openeth so manifestly, their qualities he declareth so skilfully, their
proportions he painteth out so perfectly, their colours he describeth so
artificially, and knytteth all these in such shortnesse and breuity,
that the mouth of th’aduersary must needes confesse & giue sentence that
commendation ought to bee his rewarde, and praise his deserued pension.
An ignoraunt man woulde neuer have beene drawne into this opinion, to
thincke that there had bene in England such variety & choice of dogges,
in all respectes (not onely for name but also for qualitie) so diuerse
and vnlike: But what cannot learning attaine? what cannot the kay of
knowledge open? what cannot the lampe of vnderstanding lighten? what
secretes cannot discretion detect? finally what cannot experience
comprehend? what huge heapes of histories hath _Gesnerus_ hourded vp in
volumes of a large syze? Fishes in floudes, Cattell on lande, Byrdes in
the ayre, how hath he sifted them by their naturall differences?
how closely and in how narrow a compasse hath he couched mighty and
monstruous beasts, in bygnesse lyke mountaines, the bookes themselues
being lesser then Molehilles. The lyfe of this man was not so great a
restority of comfort, as his death was an vlcer or wound of sorrow:
the losse of whom _Caius_ lamented, not so much as he was his faithfull
friende, as for that he was a famous Philosopher, and yet the former
reason (being, in very deede, vehement and forceable) did stinge him
with more griefe, then he peraduenture was willing to disclose. And
though death be counted terrible for the time, and consequently vnhappy,
yet _Caius_ aduoucheth the death of _Gesner_ most blessed, luckie, and
fortunate, as in his Booke intituled _De libris proprijs_ appeareth. But
of these two Eagles sufficient is spoken as I suppose, and yet litle
enough in consideration of their dignitie and worthines. Neurthelesse
litle or mickle, something or nothing, substaunce or shadow take all in
good part, my meaning is by a fewe wordes to wynne credit to this worke,
not so much for mine owne Englishe Translation as for the singuler
commendation of them, challenged of dutie and desart. Wherefore gentle
Reader I commit them to thy memorie, and their bookes to thy courteous
censure. They were both learned men, and painefull practitioners in
their professions, so much the more therfore are their workes worthy
estimation, I would it were in me to aduaunce them as I wishe, the worst
(and yet both, no doubt, excellent) hath deserued a monument of
immortality. Well there is no more to be added but this, that as the
translatiõ of this booke was attempted, finished, and published of
goodwill (not onely to minister pleasure, as to affoord profit) so it is
my desire and request that my labour therin employed may be acceptable,
as I hope it shalbe to men of indifferent Judgement. As for such as
shall snarr and snatch at the Englishe abridgement, and teare the
Translatour, being absent, with the teeth of spightfull enuye, I
conclude in breuity there eloquence is but currishe, if I serue in their
meate with wrong sawce, ascribe it not to vnskilfulnesse in coquery, but
to ignoraunce in their diet, for as the Poet sayeth

  _Non satis est ars sola coquo, seruire palato:_
    _Nanque coquus dontini debet habere gulam:_

  It is not enough that a cooke vnderstand,
    Except his Lordes stomack he holde in his hand.

To winde vp all in a watcheworde I saye no more, But doe well, and
Farewell,

  His and his Friendes,

  Abraham
  Fleming.



  The first Section of this
  _discourse_.

  ¶ The Preamble or entraunce, into
  this treatise.


I wrote vnto you (well beloued friende _Gesner_) not many yeares past, a
manifolde historie, contayning the diuers formes and figures of Beastes,
Byrdes, and Fyshes, the sundry shapes of plantes, and the fashions of
Hearbes, &c.

I wrote moreouer, vnto you seuerally, a certayne abridgement of Dogges,
which in your discourse vpon the fourmes of Beastes in the seconde order
of mylde and tameable Beastes, where you make mencion of Scottishe
Dogges, and in the wynding vp of your Letter written and directed to
Doctour _Turner_, comprehending a Catalogue or rehersall of your bookes
not yet extant, you promised to set forth in print, and openly to
publishe in the face of the worlde among such your workes as are not yet
come abroade to lyght and sight. But, because certaine circumstaunces
were wanting in my breuiary of Englishe Dogges (as seemed vnto mee) I
stayed the publication of the same, making promise to sende another
abroade, which myght be commytted to the handes, the eyes, the eares,
the mindes, and the iudgements of the Readers. Wherefore that I myght
perfourme that preciselye, which I promised solempnly, accomplishe my
determination, and satisfy your expectacion: which art a man desirous
and (2) capeable of all kinde of knowledge, and very earnest to be
acquaincted with all experimentes: I wyll expresse and declare in due
order, the grand and generall kinde of Englishe Dogges, the difference
of them, the vse, the propertyes, and the diuerse natures of the same,
making a tripartite diuision in this sort and maner.

All Englishe Dogges be eyther of,

  { A gentle kinde, seruing the game.
  { A homely kind, apt for sundry necessary vses.
  { A currishe kinde, meete for many toyes.

Of these three sortes or kindes so meane I to entreate, that the first
in the first place, the last in the last roome, and the myddle sort in
the middle seate be handled. I cal thẽ vniuersally all by the name of
English dogges, as well because England only, as it hath in it English
dogs, so it is not without Scottishe, as also for that wee are more
inclined and delighted with the noble game of hunting, for we Englishmen
are adicted and giuen to that exercise, & painefull pastime of pleasure,
as well for the plenty of fleshe which our Parkes and Forrests doe
foster, as also for the oportunitie and conuenient leasure which we
obtaine, both which, the Scottes want. Wherfore seeing that the whole
estate of kindly hunting consisteth principally,

  In these two pointes,

  { In chasing the beast } that is in { hunting  }
  { In taking the byrde  }            { fowleing }

It is necessary and requisite to vnderstand, that there are two sortes
of Dogges by whose meanes, the feates within specifyed are wrought,
and these practyses of actiuitie cunningly and curiously compassed,

  Two kindes of Dogges

  { One which rouseth the beast
      and continueth the chase,         }
  { Another which springeth the byrde
      and bewrayeth flight by pursuite, }

Both which kyndes are tearmed of the Latines by one common name that is,
_Canes Venatici_, hunting dogges. But (3) because we Englishe men make a
difference betweene hunting and fowleling, for that they are called by
these seuerall wordes, _Venatio_ & _Aucupium_, so they tearme the Dogges
whom they vse in these sundry games by diuers names, as those which
serue for the beast, are called _Venatici_, the other which are vsed for
the fowle are called _Aucupatorij_.

  The first kind called _Venatici_ I deuide into fiue sortes.

  { The first in perfect smelling
  { The second in quicke spying
  { The thirde in swiftnesse and quicknesse
  { The fourth in smelling & nymblenesse
  { The fifte in subtiltie and deceitfulnesse,

  excelleth.


Of the Dogge called a Harier, in Latine _Leuerarius_.

That kinde of Dogge whom nature hath indued with the vertue of smelling,
whose property it is to vse a lustines, a readines, and a couragiousnes
in hunting, and draweth into his nostrells the ayre or sent of the beast
pursued and followed, we call by this word _Sagax_, the _Græcians_ by
thys word ἰχνευτήν of tracing or chasing by y^e foote, or ῥινηλάτην,
of the nostrells, which be the instrumentes of smelling. Wee may knowe
these kinde of Dogges by their long, large, and bagging lippes, by their
hanging eares, reachyng downe both sydes of their chappes, and by the
indifferent and measurable proportion of their making. This sort of
Dogges we call _Leuerarios_ Hariers, that I may comprise the whole nũber
of them in certaine specialties, and apply to them their proper and
peculier names, for so much as they cannot all be reduced (4) and
brought vnder one sorte, considering both the sundrye uses of them,
and the difference of their seruice wherto they be appointed.

  Some for

  { The Hare
  { The Foxe
  { The Wolfe
  { The Harte
  { The Bucke
  { The Badger
  { The Otter
  { The Polcat
  { The Lobster
  { The Weasell
  { The Conny, &c.

  Some for one thing and some for another.

As for the Conny, whom we haue lastly set downe, wee use not to hunt,
but rather to take it, somtime with the nette sometime with a ferret,
and thus euery seuerall sort is notable and excellent in his naturall
qualitie and appointed practise. Among these sundry sortes, there be
some which are apt to hunt two diuers beasts, as the Foxe otherwhiles,
and other whiles the Hare, but they hunt not with such towardnes and
good lucke after them, as they doe that whereunto nature hath formed and
framed them, not onely in externall composition & making, but also in
inward faculties and conditions, for they swarue oftentimes, and doo
otherwise then they should.


Of the Dogge called a Terrar, in Latine _Terrarius_.

Another sorte there is which hunteth the Foxe and the Badger or Greye
onely, whom we call Terrars, because they (after the manner and custome
of ferrets in searching for Connyes) creepe into the grounde, and by
that meanes make afrayde, nyppe, and byte the Foxe and the Badger in
such (5) sort, that eyther they teare them in peeces with theyr teeth
beyng in the bosome of the earth, or else hayle and pull them perforce
out of their lurking angles, darke dongeons, and close caues, or at the
least through cõceaued feare, driue them out of their hollow harbours,
in so much that they are compelled to prepare speedy flight, and being
desirous of the next (albeit not the safest) refuge, are otherwise taken
and intrapped with snares and nettes layde ouer holes to the same
purpose. But these be the least in that kynde called _Sagax_.


Of the Dogge called a Bloudhounde in Latine _Sanguinarius_.

The greater sort which serue to hunt, hauing lippes of a large syze,
& eares of no small lenght, doo, not onely chase the beast whiles it
liueth, (as the other doo of whom mencion aboue is made) but beyng dead
also by any maner of casualtie, make recourse to the place where it
lyeth, hauing in this poynt an assured and infallible guyde, namely, the
sent and sauour of the bloud sprinckled heere and there vpon the ground.
For whether the beast beyng wounded, doth notwithstanding enioye life,
and escapeth the handes of the huntesman, or whether the said beast
beyng slayne is conuayed clenly out of the parcke (so that there be some
signification of bloud shed) these Dogges with no lesse facilitie and
easinesse, then auiditie and greedinesse can disclose and bewray the
same by smelling, applying to their pursute, agilitie and nimblenesse,
without tediousnesse, for which consideration, of a singuler specialtie
they deserued to bee called _Sanguinarij_ bloudhounds. And albeit
peraduenture it may chaunce, (As whether it chaunceth sealdome or
sometime I am ignorant) that a peece of fleshe be subtily stolne and
cunningly conuayed away with such prouisos and precaueats as thereby
all apparaunce (6) of bloud is eyther preuented, excluded, or concealed,
yet these kinde of dogges by a certaine direction of an inwarde assured
notyce and priuy marcke, pursue the deede dooers, through long lanes,
crooked reaches, and weary wayes, without wandring awry out of the
limites of the land whereon these desperate purloyners prepared their
speedy passage. Yea, the natures of these Dogges is such, and so
effectuall is their foresight, that they cã bewray, seperate, and pycke
them out from among an infinite multitude and an innumerable company,
creepe they neuer so farre into the thickest thronge, they will finde
him out notwithstandying he lye hidden in wylde woods, in close and
ouergrowen groues, and lurcke in hollow holes apte to harbour such
vngracious guestes. Moreouer, although they should passe ouer the water,
thinking thereby to auoyde the pursute of the houndes, yet will not
these Dogges giue ouer their attempt, but presuming to swym through the
streame, perseuer in their pursute, and when they be arriued and gotten
the further bancke, they hunt vp and downe, to and fro runne they, from
place to place shift they, vntill they haue attained to that plot of
grounde where they passed ouer. And this is their practise, if perdie
they cãnot at y^e first time smelling, finde out the way which the deede
dooers tooke to escape. So at length get they that by arte, cunning,
and diligent indeuour, which by fortune and lucke they cannot otherwyse
ouercome. In so much as it seemeth worthely and wisely written by
Ælianus in his sixte Booke, and xxxix. Chapter. Τὸ ἐνθυμητικον καὶ
διαλεκτικὸν. to bee as it were naturally instilled and powred into these
kinde of Dogges. For they wyll not pause or breath from their pursute
vntill such tyme as they bee apprehended and taken which committed the
facte. The owners of such houndes vse to keepe them in close and darke
channells in the day time, and let them lose at liberty in the night
season, to th’intent that they myght with more courage and boldnesse
practise to follow the fellon in the euening and solitarie houres of
darkenesse, when such yll disposed varlots are principally purposed (7)
to play theyr impudent pageants, & imprudent pranckes. These houndes
(vpon whom this present portion of our treatise runneth) when they are
to follow such fellowes as we haue before rehersed, vse not that liberty
to raunge at wil, which they have otherwise when they are in game,
(except upon necessary occasion, wheron dependeth an urgent and
effectuall perswasion) when such purloyners make speedy way in flight,
but beyng restrained and drawne backe from running at randon with the
leasse, the ende whereof the owner holding in his hand is led, guyded,
and directed with such swiftnesse and slownesse (whether he go on foote,
or whether he ryde on horsebacke) as he himselfe in hart would wishe for
the more easie apprehension of these venturous varlots. In the borders
of England & Scotland, (the often and accustomed stealing of cattell so
procuring) these kinde of Dogges are very much vsed and they are taught
and trayned up first of all to hunt cattell as well of the smaller as of
the greater grouth, and afterwardes (that qualitie relinquished and
lefte) they are learned to pursue such pestilent persons as plant theyr
pleasure in such practises of purloyning as we have already declared.
Of this kinde there is none that taketh the water naturally, except it
please you so to suppose of them whych follow the Otter, whych sometimes
haunte the lande, and sometime vseth the water. And yet neuerthelesse
all the kind of them boyling and broyling with greedy desire of the pray
which by swymming passeth through ryuer and flood, plung amyds the
water, and passe the streame with their pawes. But this propertie
proceedeth from an earnest desire wherwith they be inflamed, rather then
from any inclination issuyng from the ordinance and appoyntment of
nature. And albeit some of this sort in English be called _Brache_, in
Scottishe _Rache_, the cause hereof resteth in the shee sex and not in
the generall kinde. For we English men call bytches, belonging to the
(8) hunting kinde of Dogges, by the tearme aboue mencioned. To bee short
it is proper to the nature of houndes, some to keepe silence in hunting
untill such tyme as there is game offered. Othersome so soone as they
smell out the place where the beast lurcketh, to bewray it immediatly by
their importunate barcking, notwithstanding it be farre of many furlongs
cowchyng close in his cabbyn. And these Dogges the younger they be, the
more wantonly barcke they, and the more liberally, yet, oftimes without
necessitie, so that in them, by reason of theyr young yeares and want of
practise, small certaintie is to be reposed. For continuance of tyme,
and experience in game, ministreth to these houndes not onely cunning in
running, but also (as in the rest) an assured foresight what is to bee
done, principally, being acquainted with their masters watchwordes,
eyther in reuoking or imboldening them to serue the game.


Of the Dogge called the Gasehounde, in Latine _Agaseus_.

This kinde of Dogge which pursueth by the eye, preuayleth little, or
neuer a whit, by any benefite of the nose that is by smelling, but
excelleth in perspicuitie and sharpenesse of sight altogether, by the
vertue whereof, being singuler and notable, it hunteth the Foxe and the
Hare. Thys Dogge will choose and seperate any beast from among a great
flocke or hearde, and such a one will it take by election as is not
lancke, leane and hollow, but well spred, smoothe, full, fatte, and
round, it followes by the direction of the eyesight, which in deede is
cleere, constant, and not uncertaine, if a beast be wounded and gone
astray this Dogge seeketh after it by the stedfastnes of the eye, if it
chaunce peraduenture to returne & bee mingled with the residue of the
flocke, this Dogge spyeth it out by the vertue of his eye, leauing the
rest of the cattell vntouched, and after he hath set sure sight upõ it
he seperateth it from among the company and hauing so done neuer ceaseth
(9) untill he haue wearyed the Beast to death. Our countrey men call
this dogge _Agasæum_. A gasehounde because the beames of his sight are
so stedfastly setled and vnmoueably fastened. These Dogges are much and
vsually occupyed in the Northern partes of England more then in the
Southern parts, & in fealdy landes rather then in bushy and wooddy
places, horsemen vse them more then footemen to th’intent that they
might prouoke their horses to a swift galloppe (wherwith they are more
delighted then with the pray it selfe) and that they myght accustome
theyr horse to leape ouer hedges & ditches, without stoppe or stumble,
without harme or hassard, without doubt or daunger, and so escape with
safegard of lyfe. And to the ende that the ryders themselues when
necessitie so constrained, and the feare of further mischiefe inforced,
myght saue themselues vndamnifyed, and preuent each perilous tempest by
preparing speedy flight, or else by swift pursute made vpon theyr
enimyes, myght both ouertake them, encounter with them, and make a
slaughter of them accordingly. But if it fortune so at any time that
this Dogge take a wrong way, the master making some vsuall signe and
familiar token, he returneth forthwith, and taketh the right and ready
trace, beginning his chase a fresh, & with a cleare voyce, and a swift
foote followeth the game with as much courage and nimblenesse as he did
at the first.


Of the Dogge called the Grehounde, in Latine _Leporarius_.

There is another kinde of Dogge which for his incredible swiftnesse is
called _Leporarius_ a Grehounde, because the principall seruice of them
dependeth and consisteth in starting and hunting the hare, which Dogges
likewyse are indued with no lesse strength then lightnes in maintenance
of the (10) game, in seruing the chase, in taking the Bucke, the Harte,
the Dowe, the Foxe, and other beastes of semblable kinde ordained for
the game of hunting. But more or lesse, each one according to the
measure and proportion of theyr desire, and as might and habilitie of
theyr bodyes will permit and suffer. For it is a spare and bare kinde of
Dogge, (of fleshe but not of bone) some are of a greater sorte, and some
of a lesser, some are smooth skynned, & some are curled, the bigger
therefore are appoynted to hunt the bigger beasts, & the smaller serue
to hunt the smaller accordingly. The nature of these dogges I finde to
be wonderful by y^e testimoniall of histories. For, as Iohn Froisart the
Historyographer in his 4. _lib._ reporteth. A Grehound of King Richard,
the second y^t wore the Crowne, and bare the Scepter of the Realme of
England, neuer knowing any man, beside the kings person, whẽ _Henry
Duke_ of _Lancaster_ came to the castle of _Flinte_ to take King
_Richarde_. The Dogge forsaking his former Lord & master came to _Duke
Henry_, fawned upon him with such resemblaunces of goodwyll and
conceaued affection, as he fauoured King _Richarde_ before: he followed
the Duke, and vtterly left the King. So that by these manifest
circumstances a man myght iudge this Dogge to haue bene lightened wyth
the lampe of foreknowledge & vnderstãding, touchyng his olde masters
miseryes to come, and vnhappinesse nye at hand, which King _Richarde_
himselfe euidently perceaued, accounting this deede of his Dogge a
Prophecy of his ouerthrowe.


Of the Dogge called the Leuiner, or Lyemmer in Latine _Lorarius_.

Another sort of dogges be there, in smelling singuler, and in swiftnesse
incomparable. This is (as it were) a myddle kinde betwixt the Harier and
the Grehounde, as well for his kinde, as for the frame of his body. And
it is called in latine _Leuinarius_, _a Leuitate_, of lyghtnesse, and
therefore may well be called a lyghthounde, it is also called by this
worde _Lorarius_, _a Loro_, wherwith it is led. This Dogge for the (11)
excellency of his conditions, namely smelling and swift running, doth
followe the game with more eagernes, and taketh the pray with a iolly
quicknes.


Of the Dogge called a Tumbler, in Latine _Vertagus_.

This sorte of Dogges, which compasseth all by craftes, fraudes,
subtelties and deceiptes, we Englishe men call Tumblers, because in
hunting they turne and tumble, winding their bodyes about in circle
wise, and then fearcely and violently venturing upõ the beast, doth
soddenly gripe it, at the very entrance and mouth of their receptacles,
or closets before they can recouer meanes, to saue and succour
themselues. This dogge vseth another craft and subteltie, namely, when
he runneth into a warren, or setteth a course about a connyburrough,
he huntes not after them, he frayes them not by barcking, he makes no
countenance or shadow of hatred against them, but dissembling
friendship, and pretending fauour, passeth by with silence and
quietnesse, marking and noting their holes diligently, wherin (I warrant
you) he will not be ouershot nor deceaued. When he commeth to the place
where Connyes be, of a certaintie, he cowcheth downe close with his
belly to the groũd, Prouided alwayes by his skill and polisie, that y^e
winde bee neuer with him but against him in such an enterprise. And that
the Connyes spie him not where he lurcketh. By which meanes he obtaineth
the sent and sauour of the Connyes, carryed towardes him with the wind &
the ayre, either going to their holes, or cõming out, eyther passing
this way, or running that way, and so prouideth by his circumspection,
that the selly simple Conny is debarred quite from his hole (which is
the hauen of their hope and the harbour of their health) and
fraudulently circumuented and taken, before they can get the aduantage
(12) of their hole. Thus hauing caught his pray he carryeth it speedily
to his Master, wayting his Dogges returne in some conuenient lurcking
corner. These Dogges are somewhat lesser than the houndes, and they be
lancker & leaner, beside that they be somwhat prick eared. A man that
shall marke the forme and fashion of their bodyes, may well call them
mungrell Grehoundes if they were somwhat bigger. But notwithstanding
they counteruaile not the Grehound in greatnes, yet will he take in one
dayes space as many Connyes as shall arise to as bigge a burthen, and as
heauy a loade as a horse can carry, for deceipt and guile is the
instrument wherby he maketh this spoyle, which pernicious properties
supply the places of more commendable qualities.


Of the Dogge called the theeuishe Dogge in Latine _Canis furax_.

The like to that whom we have rehearsed, is the theeuishe Dogge, which
at the mandate and bydding of his master steereth and leereth abroade in
the night, hunting Connyes by the ayre, which is leuened with their
sauour and conueyed to the sense of smelling by the meanes of the winde
blowing towardes him. During all which space of his hunting he will not
barcke, least he shoulde bee preiudiciall to his owne aduantage. And
thus watcheth and snatcheth up in course as many Connyes as his Master
will suffer him, and beareth them to his Masters standing. The farmers
of the countrey and uplandishe dwellers, call this kinde of Dogge a
nyght curre, because he hunteth in the darke. But let thus much seeme
sufficient for Dogges which serue the game and disport of hunting.


  (13) ¶ A Diall pertaining to the
  _first Section._

  Dogges seruing y^e pastime of hunting beastes.
  are diuided into

  { Hariers
  { Terrars
  { Bloudhounds
  { Gasehounds
  { Grehounds
  { Leuiners or
  { Lyemmers
  { Tumblers
  { Stealers

  In Latine called _Venatici_.




  The seconde Section of (14)
  _this discourse_.

  Of gentle Dogges seruing the hauke, and first
  of the Spaniell, called in Latine
  _Hispaniolus_.


Svch Dogges as serue for fowling, I thinke conuenient and requisite to
place in this seconde Section of this treatise. These are also to bee
reckoned and accounted in the number of the dogges which come of a
gentle kind, and of those which serue for fowling.

  There be two sortes

  { The first findeth game on the land.
  { The other findeth game on the water.

Such as delight on the land, play their partes, eyther by swiftnesse of
foote, or by often questing, to search out and to spring the byrde for
further hope of aduauntage, or else by some secrete signe and priuy
token bewray the place where they fall.

  The first kinde of such serue { The Hauke,
  The seconde,                  { The net, or, traine,

The first kinde haue no peculier names assigned vnto them, saue onely
that they be denominated after the byrde which by naturall appointment
he is alotted to take, for the which consideration. (15)

  Some be called Dogges,

  { For the Falcon }
  { The Phesant    }
  { The Partridge  }

  and such like,

The common sort of people call them by one generall word, namely
Spaniells. As though these kinde of Dogges came originally and first of
all out of Spaine, The most part of their skynnes are white, and if they
be marcked with any spottes, they are commonly red, and somewhat great
therewithall, the heares not growing in such thicknesse but that the
mixture of them maye easely bee perceaued. Othersome of them be reddishe
and blackishe, but of that sorte there be but a very few. There is also
at this day among vs a newe kinde of dogge brought out of Fraunce (for
we Englishe men are maruailous greedy gaping gluttons after nouelties,
and couetous coruorauntes of things that be seldom, rare, straunge, and
hard to get.) And they bee speckled all ouer with white and black, which
mingled colours incline to a marble blewe, which bewtifyeth their
skinnes and affordeth a seemely show of comlynesse. These are called
French dogges as is aboue declared already.


The Dogge called the Setter, in Latine _Index_.

Another sort of Dogges be there, seruiceable for fowling, making no
noise either with foote or with tounge, whiles they followe the game.
These attend diligently vpon theyr Master and frame their conditions to
such beckes, motions, and gestures, as it shall please him to exhibite
and make, either going forward, drawing backeward, inclining to the
right hand, or yealding toward the left, (In making mencion of fowles,
my meaning is of the Partridge & the Quaile) when he hath founde the
byrde, he keepeth sure and fast silence, he stayeth his steppes and wil
proceede no further, and with a (16) close, couert, watching eye, layeth
his belly to the grounde and so creepeth forward like a worme. When he
approcheth neere to the place where the birde is, he layes him downe,
and with a marcke of his pawes betrayeth the place of the byrdes last
abode, whereby it is supposed that this kinde of dogge is called
_Index_, Setter, being in deede a name most consonant and agreable to
his quality. The place being knowne by the meanes of the dogge, the
fowler immediatly openeth and spreedeth his net, intending to take them,
which being done the dogge at the accustomed becke or vsuall signe of
his Master ryseth vp by and by, and draweth neerer to the fowle that by
his presence they might be the authors of their owne insnaring, and be
ready intangled in the prepared net, which conning and artificiall
indeuour in a dogge (being a creature domesticall or householde seruaunt
brought vp at home with offalls of the trencher & fragments of
victualls,) is not much to be maruailed at, seing that a Hare (being a
wilde and skippishe beast) was seene in England to the astonishment of
the beholders, in the yeare of our Lorde God, 1564, not onely dauncing
in measure, but playing with his former feete vppon a tabberet, and
obseruing iust number of strokes (as a practicioner in that arte)
besides that nipping & pinching a dogge with his teeth and clawes, &
cruelly thumping him with y^e force of his feete. This is no trumpery
tale, nor trifling toye (as I imagine) and therefore not vnworthy to bee
reported, for I recken it a requitall of my trauaile, not to drowne in
the seas of silence any speciall thing, wherin the prouidence and
effectuall working of nature is to be pondered.


Of the Dogge called the water Spaniell, or finder, in Latine _Aquaticus
seu Inquisitor_.

That kinde of Dogge whose seruice is required in fowling vpon the water,
partly through a naturall towardnesse, and partly by diligent teaching,
is indued with that property. (17) This sort is somewhat bigge, and of a
measurable greatnesse, hauing long, rough, and curled heare, not
obtayned by extraordinary trades, but giuen by natures appointment, yet
neuerthelesse (friend _Gesner_) I have described and set him out in this
maner, namely powlde and netted from the shoulders to the hindermost
legges, and to the end of his tayle, which I did for vse and customs
cause, that beyng as it were made somewhat bare and naked, by shearing
of such superfluitie of heare, they might atchiue the more lightnesse,
and swiftnesse, and be lesse hindered in swymming, so troublesome and
needelesse a burthen being shaken of. This kinde of dogge is properly
called, _Aquaticus_, a water spaniel because he frequenteth and hath
vsual recourse to the water where all his game & exercise lyeth, namely,
waterfowles, which are taken by the helpe & seruice of them, in their
kind. And principally duckes and drakes, wherupon he is lykewise named a
dogge for the ducke, because in that quallitie he is excellent. With
these dogges also we fetche out of the water such fowle as be stounge to
death by any venemous worme, we vse them also to bring vs our boultes &
arrowes out of the water, (missing our marcke) whereat we directed our
leuell, which otherwise we should hardly recouer, and oftentimes they
restore to vs our shaftes which we thought neuer to see, touche or
handle againe, after they were lost, for which circumstaunces they are
called _Inquisitores_, searchers, and finders. Although the ducke
otherwhiles notably deceaueth both the dogge and the master, by dyuing
vnder the water, and also by naturall subtilty, for if any man shall
approche to the place where they builde, breede, and syt, the hennes go
out of their neastes, offering themselues voluntarily to the hãds, as it
were, of such as draw nie their neasts. And a certaine weaknesse of
their winges pretended, and infirmitie of their feete dissembled, they
go so slowely and so leasurely, that to a mans thinking it were no
masteryes to take them. By which deceiptfull tricke they doe as it were
(18) entyse and allure men to follow them, till they be drawne a long
distaunce from theyr neastes, which being compassed by their prouident
conning, or conning prouidence, they cut of all inconueniences which
might growe of their returne, by using many carefull and curious
caueates, least theyr often haunting bewray y^e place where the young
ducklings be hatched. Great therfore is theyr desire, & earnest is theyr
study to take heede, not only to theyr broode but also to themselues.
For when they haue an ynckling that they are espied they hide themselues
vnder turfes or sedges, wherwith they couer and shrowde themselues so
closely and so craftely, that (notwithstanding the place where they
lurcke be found and perfectly perceaued) there they will harbour without
harme, except the water spaniell by quicke smelling discouer theyr
deceiptes.


Of the Dogge called the Fisher, in Latine _Canis Piscator_.

The Dogge called the fisher, wherof _Hector Boethus_ writeth, which
seeketh for fishe by smelling among rockes & stones, assuredly I knowe
none of that kinde in Englande, neither haue I receaued by reporte that
there is any suche, albeit I haue bene diligent & busie in demaunding
the question as well of fishermen, as also of huntesmen in that behalfe
being carefull and earnest to learne and vnderstand of them if any such
were, except you holde opinion that the beauer or Otter is a fishe (as
many haue beleeued) & according to their beliefe affirmed, and as the
birde _Pupine_, is thought to be a fishe and so accounted. But that
kinde of dogge which followeth the fishe to apprehend and take it (if
there bee any of that disposition and property) whether they do this for
the game of hunting, or for the heate of hunger, as other Dogges do
which rather then they wil be famished for want of foode, couet the
carckases of carrion and putrifyed fleshe. When I am fully resolued and
disburthened of this doubt I wil send you certificate in writing. In the
meane season I am not ignorant of that both Ælianus, and Ælius, call the
Beauer (19) κύνα ποτάμιον a water dogge, or a dogge fishe, I know
likewise thus much more, that the Beauer doth participate this propertie
with the dogge, namely, that when fishes be scarse they leaue the water
and raunge vp and downe the lande, making an insatiable slaughter of
young lambes vntil theyr paunches be replenished, and whẽ they haue fed
themselues full of fleshe, then returne they to the water, from whence
they came. But albeit so much be graunted that this Beauer is a dogge,
yet it is to be noted that we recken it not in the beadrowe of Englishe
dogges as we haue done the rest. The sea Calfe, in like maner, which our
country mẽ for breuitie sake call a Seele, other more largely name a
_Sea Vele_, maketh a spoyle of fishes betweene rockes and banckes, but
it is not accounted in the catalogue or nũber of our Englishe dogges,
notwithstanding we call it by the name of a Sea dogge or a sea Calfe.
And thus much for our dogges of the second sort called in Latine
_Aucupatorij_, seruing to take fowle either by land or water.


  ¶ A Diall pertaining to the
  _second Section_.

  Dogges seruing the disport of fowling.
  are diuided into

  { Land spaniels
  { Setters
  { Water spaniels or finders.

  called in latine _Canes Aucupatorij_

The fisher is not of their number, but seuerall.




  The thirde Section of this (20)
  _abridgement_.


Nowe followeth in due order and conuenient place our Englishe Dogges of
the thirde gentle kinde, what they are called to what vse they serue,
and what sort of people plant their pleasure in thẽ, which because they
neede no curious canuassing and nye syfting, wee meane to bee so much
the briefer.


  Of the delicate, neate, and pretty kind of dogges
  called the Spaniel gentle, or the comforter,
  in Latine _Melitæus
  or Fotor_.

There is, besides those which wee haue already deliuered, another sort
of gentle dogges in this our Englishe soyle but exempted from the order
of the residue, the Dogges of this kinde doth _Callimachus_ call
_Melitæos_, of the Iseland _Melita_, in the sea of _Sicily_, (what at
this day is named _Malta_, an Iseland in deede, famous and renoumed,
with couragious and puisaunt souldiours valliauntly fighting vnder the
banner of Christ their vnconquerable captaine) where this kind of dogges
had their principall beginning.

These dogges are litle, pretty, proper, and fyne, and sought for to
satisfie the delicatenesse of daintie dames, and wanton womens wills,
instrumentes of folly for them to play and dally withall, to tryfle away
the treasure of time, to withdraw their mindes from more commendable
exercises, and to content (21) their corrupted concupiscences with vaine
disport (A selly shift to shunne yrcksome ydlnesse.) These puppies the
smaller they be, the more pleasure they prouoke, as more meete play
fellowes for minsing mistrisses to beare in their bosoms, to keepe
company withal in their chambers, to succour with sleepe in bed, and
nourishe with meate at bourde, to lay in their lappes, and licke their
lippes as they ryde in their waggons, and good reason it should be so,
for coursnesse with fynenesse hath no fellowship, but featnesse with
neatenesse hath neighbourhood enough. That plausible prouerbe verified
vpon a Tyraunt, namely that he loued his sowe better then his sonne, may
well be applyed to these kinde of people who delight more in dogges that
are depriued of all possibility of reason, then they doe in children
that be capeable of wisedome and iudgement. But this abuse peraduenture
raigneth where there hath bene long lacke of issue, or else where
barrennes is the best blossome of bewty.


The vertue which remaineth in the Spainell gentle otherwise called the
comforter.

Notwithstanding many make much of those pretty puppies called Spaniels
gentle, yet if the question were demaunded what propertie in them they
spye, which shoulde make them so acceptable and precious in their sight,
I doubt their aunswere would be long a coyning. But seeing it was our
intent to trauaile in this treatise, so that y^e reader might reape some
benefite by his reading, we will communicate vnto you such coniectures
as are grounded upon reason. And though some suppose that such dogges
are fyt for no seruice, I dare say, by their leaues, they be in a wrong
boxe. Among all other qualities therfore of nature, which be knowne (for
some conditions are couered with continuall and thicke clouds, that the
eye of our capacities can not pearse through thẽ) we (22) find that
these litle dogs are good to asswage the sicknesse of the stomacke being
oftentimes thervnto applyed as a plaster preseruatiue, or borne in the
bosom of the diseased and weake person, which effect is performed by
theyr moderate heate. Moreouer the disease and sicknesse chaungeth his
place and entreth (though it be not precisely marcked) into the dogge,
which to be no vntruth, experience can testify, for these kinde of
dogges sometimes fall sicke, and sometime die, without any harme
outwardly inforced, which is an argument that the disease of the
gentleman, or gentle woman or owner whatsoeuer, entreth into the dogge
by the operation of heate intermingled and infected. And thus haue I
hetherto handled dogges of a gentle kinde whom I haue comprehended in a
triple diuisiõ. Now it remaineth that I annex in due order such dogges
as be of a more homely kinde.


  A Diall pertaining to the
  _thirde Section_.

  In the third section is cõtained one kind of dog which is called the

  Spaniell gentle or the cõforter,

  It is also called

  { A chamber cõpanion,
  { A pleasaunt playfellow,
  { A pretty worme,

  generally called _Canis delicatus_.




  (23) The fourth Section of this
  _discourse_.


  Dogges of a course kind seruing for many necessary
  vses called in Latine _Canes rustici_, and first of
  the shepherds dogge called in Latine
  _Canis Pastoralis_.

Dogges of the courser sort are

  { The shepherds dogge
  { The mastiue or Bandogge.

These two are the principall.

The first kinde, namely the shepherds hounde is very necessarye and
profitable for the auoyding of harmes and inconueniences which may come
to men by the meanes of beastes. The second sort serue to succour
against the snares and attemptes of mischiefous men. Our shepherdes
dogge is not huge, vaste, and bigge, but of an indifferent stature and
growth, because it hath not to deale with the bloudthyrsty wolf,
sythence there be none in England, which happy and fortunate benefite is
to be ascribed to the puisaunt Prince _Edgar_, who to thintent y^t the
whole countrey myght be euacuated and quite cleered from wolfes, charged
& commaunded the welshemẽ (who were pestered with these butcherly
beastes aboue measure) to paye him yearely tribute which was (note the
wisedome of the King) three hundred Wolfes. Some there be which write
that _Ludwall_ Prince of Wales paide yeerely to King _Edgar_ three
hundred wolfes in the name of an exaction (as we haue sayd before.) And
that by the meanes hereof, within the compasse and tearme of (24) foure
yeares, none of those noysome, and pestilent Beastes were left in the
coastes of England and Wales. This _Edgar_ wore the Crowne royall, and
bare the Scepter imperiall of this kingdome, about the yeere of our
Lorde, nyne hundred fifty, nyne. Synce which time we reede that no Wolfe
hath bene seene in England, bred within the bounds and borders of this
countrey, mary there have bene diuers brought ouer from beyonde the
seas, for greedynesse of gaine and to make money, for gasing and gaping,
staring, and standing to see them, being a straunge beast, rare, and
seldom seene in England. But to returne to our shepherds dogge. This
dogge either at the hearing of his masters voyce, or at the wagging and
whisteling in his fist, or at his shrill and horse hissing bringeth the
wandring weathers and straying sheepe, into the selfe same place where
his masters will and wishe is to haue thẽ, wherby the shepherd reapeth
this benefite, namely, that with litle labour and no toyle or mouing of
his feete he may rule and guide his flocke, according to his owne
desire, either to haue them go forward, or to stand still, or to drawe
backward, or to turne this way, or to take that way. For it is not in
Englande, as it is in _Fraunce_, as it is in _Flaunders_, as it is in
_Syria_, as it in _Tartaria_, where the sheepe follow the shepherd, for
heere in our country the sheepherd followeth the sheepe. And somtimes
the straying sheepe, when no dogge runneth before them, nor goeth about
& beside them, gather themselues together in a flocke, when they heere
the sheepherd whistle in his fist, for feare of the Dogge (as I imagine)
remembring this (if vnreasonable creatures may be reported to haue
memory) that the Dogge commonly runneth out at his masters warrant which
is his whistle. This haue we oftentimes diligently marcked in taking our
journey from towne to towne, when wee haue hard a sheepherd whistle we
haue rayned in our horse and stoode styll a space, to see the proofe and
triall of this matter. Furthermore with this dogge doth the sheepherd
take sheepe for y^e slaughter, and to be (25) healed if they be sicke,
no hurt or harme in the world done to the simple creature.


Of the mastiue or Bandogge called in Latine _Villaticus_ or
_Cathenarius_.

This kinde of Dogge called a mastyue or Bandogge is vaste, huge,
stubborne, ougly, and eager, of a heuy and burthenous body, and therfore
but of litle swiftnesse, terrible, and frightfull to beholde, and more
fearce and fell then any _Arcadian_ curre (notwithstãding they are sayd
to ha{n}e their generation of the violent Lyon.) They are called
_Villatici_, because they are appoynted to watche and keepe farme places
and coũtry cotages sequestred from commõ recourse, and not abutting vpon
other houses by reason of distaunce, when there is any feare conceaued
of theefes, robbers, spoylers, and night wanderers. They are seruiceable
against the Foxe and the Badger, to drive wilde and tame swyne out of
Medowes, pastures, glebelandes and places planted with fruite, to bayte
and take the bull by the eare, when occasion so requireth. One dogge or
two at the vttermost, sufficient for that purpose be the bull neuer so
monsterous, neuer so fearce, neuer so furious, neuer so stearne, neuer
so vntameable. For it is a kinde of dogge capeable of courage, violent
and valiaunt, striking could feare into the harts of men, but standing
in feare of no man, in so much that no weapons will make him shrincke,
nor abridge his boldnes. Our Englishe men (to th’ intent that theyr
dogges might be the more fell and fearce) assist nature with arte, vse,
and custome, for they teach theyr dogges to baite the Beare, to baite
the Bull and other such like cruell and bloudy beastes (appointing an
ouerseer of the game) without any collar to defend theyr throtes, and
oftentimes they traine them vp in fighting and wrestling with a man
hauing for the safegarde of his lyfe, eyther a Pikestaffe, a (26)
clubbe, or a sworde and by vsing them to such exercises as these, theyr
dogges become more sturdy and strong. The force which is in them
surmounteth all beleefe, the fast holde which they take with their teeth
exceedeth all credit, three of them against a Beare, fowre against a
Lyon are sufficient, both to try masteryes with them and vtterly to
ouermatch them. Which thing _Henry_ the seuenth of that name, King of
England (a Prince both politique & warlike) perceauing on a certaine
time (as the report runneth) commaunded all such dogges (how many soeuer
they were in number) should be hanged, beyng deepely displeased, and
conceauing great disdaine, that an yll fauoured rascall curre should
with such violent villany, assault the valiaunt Lyon king of all
beastes. An example for all subiectes worthy remembraunce, to admonishe
them that it is no aduantage to them to rebell against y^e regiment of
their ruler, but to keepe them within the limits of Loyaltie. I reede an
history aunswerable to this of the selfe same _Henry_, who hauing a
notable and an excellent fayre Falcon, it fortuned that the kings
Falconers, in the presence and hearing of his grace, highly commended
his Maiesties Falcon, saying that it feared not to intermeddle with an
Eagle, it was so venturous a byrde and so mighty, which when the King
harde, he charged that the Falcon should be killed without delay,
for the selfe same reason (as it may seeme) which was rehersed in the
cõclusion of the former history concerning the same king. This dogge is
called, in like maner, _Cathenarius_, _a Cathena_, of the chaine
wherwith he is tyed at the gates, in y^e day time, least beyng lose he
should doe much mischiefe and yet might giue occasion of feare and
terror by his bigge barcking. And albeit _Cicero_ in his oration had
_Pro. S. Ross._ be of this opinion, that such Dogges as barcke in the
broade day light shoulde haue their legges broken, yet our countrymen,
on this side the seas for their carelessnes of lyfe setting all at
cinque and sice, are of a contrary iudgement. For theefes roge vp & down
in euery corner, no place is free from them, no not y^e princes pallace,
(27) nor the country mans cotage. In the day time they practise
pilfering, picking, open robbing, and priuy stealing, and what
legerdemaine lacke they? not fearing the shamefull and horrible death of
hanging. The cause of which inconuenience doth not onely issue from
nipping neede & wringing want, for all y^t steale, are not pinched with
pouerty, but som steale to maintaine their excessiue and prodigall
expences in apparell, their lewdnes of lyfe, their hautines of hart,
theyr wantonnes of maners, theyr wilfull ydlenes, their ambitious
brauery, and the pryde of the sawcy _Salacones’_ μεγαλορρούντων vaine
glorious and arrogant in behauiour, whose delight dependeth wholly to
mount nimbly on horsebacke, to make them leape lustely, spring and
praunce, galloppe and amble, to runne a race, to wynde in compasse, and
so forthe, liuing all together vpon the fatnesse of the spoyle. Othersom
therbe which steale, being thereto prouoked by penury & neede, like
masterlesse mẽ applying themselues to no honest trade, but raunging vp
and downe impudently begging, and complayning of bodily weakenesse where
is no want of abilitie. But valiaunt _Valentine_ th’emperour, by holsome
lawes prouided that suche as hauing no corporall sicknesse, solde
themselues to begging, pleded pouerty wyth pretended infirmitie, &
cloaked their ydle and slouthfull life with colourable shifts and cloudy
cossening, should be a perpetuall slaue and drudge to him, by whom their
impudent ydlenes was bewrayed, and layde against them in publique place,
least the insufferable slouthfullnes of such vagabondes should be
burthenous to the people, or being so hatefull and odious, should growe
into an example. _Alfredus_ likewise in the gouernment of his common
wealth, procured such increase of credite to Justice and vpright dealing
by his prudent actes and statutes, that if a mã trauailing by the hygh
way of the countrey vnder his dominion, chaunced to lose a budget full
of gold, or his capcase farsed with things of great value, late in the
euening, he should finde it where (28) he lost it, safe, sound, and
vntouched the next morning, yea (which is a wonder) at any time for a
whole monethes space if he sought for it, as _Ingulphus Croyladensis_ in
his History recordeth. But in this our vnhappy age, in these (I say) our
deuelishe dayes nothing can scape the clawes of the spoyler, though it
be kept neuer so sure within the house, albe it the doores bee lockt and
boulted round about. This dogge in like maner of _Græcians_ is called
οἰκουρος.


Of the latinists _Canis Custos_, in Englishe the Dogge keeper.

Borrowing his name of his seruire, for he doth not onely keepe farmers
houses, but also merchaunts maisons, wherin great wealth, riches,
substaunce, and costly stuffe is reposed. And therfore were certaine
dogges founde and maintained at the common costes and charges of the
Citizens of _Rome_ in the place called _Capitolium_, to giue warning of
theefes comming. This kind of dogge, is also called,


In latine _Canis Laniarius_ in Englishe the Butchers Dogge.

So called for the necessity of his vse, for his seruice affoordeth great
benefite to the Butcher as well in following as in taking his cattell
when neede constraineth, vrgeth, and requireth. This kinde of dogge is
likewise called,


In latine _Molossicus_ or _Molossus_.

After the name of a countrey in _Epirus_ called _Molossia_, which
harboureth many stoute, stronge, and sturdy Dogges of this sort, for the
dogges of that countrey are good in deede, or else their is no trust to
be had in the testimonie of writers. This dogge is also called,


In latine _Canis Mandatarius_ a Dogge messinger or Carrier.

Upon substanciall consideration, because at his masters voyce and
commaundement, he carrieth letters from place to place, wrapped vp
cunningly in his lether collar, fastened therto, or sowed close therin,
who, least he should be hindered in his passage vseth these helpes very
skilfully, namely resistaunce (29) in fighting if he be not ouermatched,
or else swiftnesse & readinesse in running away, if he be vnable to
buckle with the dogge that would faine haue a snatch at his skinne. This
kinde of dogge is likewise called,


In latine _Canis Lunarius_, in Englishe the Mooner.

Because he doth nothing else but watch and warde at an ynche, wasting
the wearisome night season without slombering or sleeping, bawing &
wawing at the Moone (that I may vse the word of _Nonius_) a qualitie in
mine opinion straunge to consider. This kinde of dogge is also called.


In latine _Aquarius_ in Englishe a water drawer.

And these be of the greater and the waighter sort drawing water out of
wells and deepe pittes, by a wheele which they turne rounde about by the
mouing of their burthenous bodies. This kinde of dogge is called in like
maner.


_Canis Sarcinarius_ in Latine, and may aptly be englished a Tynckers
Curre.

Because with marueilous pacience they beare bigge budgettes fraught with
Tinckers tooles, and mettall meete to mend kettels, porrige pottes,
skellets, and chafers, and other such like trumpery requisite for their
occupacion and loytering trade, easing him of a great burthen which
otherwise he himselfe should carry vpon his shoulders, which condition
hath challenged vnto them the foresaid name. Besides the qualities which
we haue already recounted, this kind of dogges hath this principall
property ingrafted in them, that they loue their masters liberally, and
hate straungers despightfully, wherevpon it followeth that they are to
their masters, in traueiling a singuler safgard, defending them
forceably from the inuasion of villons and theefes, preseruing their
lyfes from losse, and their health from hassard, theyr fleshe from
hacking and hewing with such like desperate daungers. For which
consideration they are meritoriously (30) tearmed,


In Latine _Canes defensores_ defending dogges in our mother tounge.

If it chaunce that the master bee oppressed, either by a multitude, or
by the greater violence & so be beaten downe that he lye groueling on
the grounde, (it is proued true by experience) that this Dogge forsaketh
not his master, no not when he is starcke deade: But induring the force
of famishment and the outragious tempestes of the weather, most
vigilantly watcheth and carefully keepeth the deade carkasse many dayes,
indeuouring, furthermore, to kil the murtherer of his master, if he may
get any aduantage. Or else by barcking, by howling, by furious iarring,
snarring, and such like meanes betrayeth the malefactour as desirous to
haue the death of his aforesayde Master rigorouslye reuenged. An example
hereof fortuned within the compasse of my memory. The Dogge of a
certaine wayefaring man trauailing from the Citie of London directly to
the Towne of Kingstone (most famous and renowned by reason of the
triumphant coronation of eight seuerall Kings) passing ouer a good
portion of his iourney was assaulted and set vpon by certaine
confederate theefes laying in waight for the spoyle in _Comeparcke_,
a perillous bottom, compassed about wyth woddes to well knowne for the
manyfolde murders & mischeefeous robberies theyr committed. Into whose
handes this passinger chaunced to fall, so that his ill lucke cost him
the price of his lyfe. And that Dogge whose syer was Englishe (which
_Blondus_ registreth to haue bene within the banckes of his remẽbrance)
manifestly perceauyng that his Master was murthered (this chaunced not
farre from _Paris_) by the handes of one which was a suiter to the same
womã, whom he was a wooer vnto, dyd both bewraye the bloudy butcher, and
attempted to teare out the villons throate if he had not sought meanes
to auoyde the reuenging rage of the Dogge. In fyers also which fortune
in the silence (31) and dead time of the night, or in stormy weather of
the sayde season, the older dogges barcke, ball, howle, and yell (yea
notwithstandyng they bee roughly rated) neyther will they stay their
tounges till the householde seruauntes, awake, ryse, searche, and see
the burning of the fyre, which beyng perceaued they vse voluntary
silence, and cease from yolping. This hath bene, and is founde true by
tryall, in sundry partes of England. There was no faynting faith in that
Dogge, which when his Master by a mischaunce in hunting stumbled and
fell toppling downe a deepe dytche beyng vnable to recouer of himselfe,
the Dogge signifying his masters mishappe, reskue came, and he was
hayled up by a rope, whom the Dogge seeyng almost drawne up to the edge
of the dytche, cheerefully saluted, leaping and skipping vpon his master
as though he woulde haue imbraced hym, beyng glad of his presence, whose
longer absence he was lothe to lacke. Some Dogges there be, which will
not suffer fyery coales to lye skattered about the hearthe, but with
their pawes wil rake up the burnyng coales, musying and studying fyrst
with themselues how it myght conueniently be done. And if so bee that
the coales cast to great a heate then will they buyry them in ashes and
so remoue them forwarde to a fyt place wyth theyr noses. Other Dogges
bee there which exequute the office of a Farmer in the nyghte tyme. For
when his master goeth to bedde to take his naturall sleepe, And when,

  A hundred barres of brasse and yron boltes,
  Make all things safe from startes and from reuoltes.
  VVhen Ianus keepes the gate with Argos eye,
  That daungers none approch, ne mischiefes nye.

As Virgill vaunteth in his verses, Then if his master byddeth him go
abroade, he lingereth not, but raungeth ouer all his lands lying there
about, more diligently, I wys, then any farmer himselfe. And if he finde
anything their that is straunge and pertaining to other persons besides
his master, (32) whether it be man, woman, or beast, he driueth them out
of the ground, not medling with any thing which doth belong to the
possession and vse of his master. But how much faythfulnes, so much
diuersitie there is in their natures,


For there be some,

  { Which barcke only with free and open throate but will not bite,
  { Which doe both barcke and byte,
  { Which bite bitterly before they barcke,

The first are not greatly to be feared, because they themselues are
fearefull, and fearefull dogges (as the prouerbe importeth) barcke most
vehemently.

The second are daungerous, it is wisedome to take heede of them because
they sounde, as it were, an _Alarum_ of an afterclappe, and these dogges
must not be ouer much moued or prouoked, for then they take on
outragiously as if they were madde, watching to set the print of their
teeth in the fleshe. And these kinde of dogges are fearce and eager by
nature.

The thirde are deadly, for they flye upon a man, without vtteraunce of
voyce, snatch at him, and catche him by the throate, and most cruelly
byte out colloppes of fleashe. Feare these kind of Curres, (if thou be
wise and circumspect about thine owne safetie) for they bee stoute and
stubberne dogges, and set vpon a man at a sodden vnwares. By these
signes and tokens, by these notes and argumentes our men discerne the
cowardly curre from the couragious dogge the bolde from the fearefull,
the butcherly from the gentle and tractable. Moreouer they coniecture
that a whelpe of an yll kinde is not worthe the keeping and that no
dogge can serue the sundry vses of men so aptly and so conueniently as
this sort of whom we haue so largely written already. For if any be
disposed to drawe the aboue named seruices into a table, what mã more
clearely, and with more vehemency of voyce giueth warning eyther of a
wastefull beast, or of a spoiling theefe then this? who by his barcking
(as good as a burning beacon) (33) foreshoweth hassards at hand? What
maner of beast stronger? what seruaũt to his master more louing? what
companion more trustie? what watchman more vigilant? what reuenger more
constant? what messinger more speedie? what water bearer more painefull?
Finally what packhorse more patient? And thus much concerning English
Dogges, first of the gentle kinde, secondly of the courser kinde. Nowe
it remaineth that we deliuer vnto you the Dogges of a mungrell or a
currishe kinde, and then will wee perfourme our taske.


  ¶ A Diall pertaining to the
  _fourth Section_.

  Dogs comprehended in y^e fourth section are these

  { The shepherds dogge
  { The Mastiue or Bandogge,

  which hath sundry names diriued frõ sundry circũstances as

  { The keeper or watch man
  { The butchers dogge
  { The messinger or carrier
  { The Mooner
  { The water drawer
  { The Tinckers curr
  { The fencer,

  called in Latine _Canes Rustici_.




  (34) The fifth Section of this
  _treatise_.

  Containing Curres of the mungrell and rascall sort and
  first of the Dogge called in Latine, _Admonitor_,
  and of vs in Englishe VVappe
  or VVarner.


Of such dogges as keepe not their kinde, of such as are mingled out of
sundry sortes not imitating the conditions of some one certaine spice,
because they resẽble no notable shape, nor exercise any worthy property
of the true perfect and gentle kind, it is not necessarye that I write
any more of them, but to banishe them as vnprofitable implements, out of
the boundes of my Booke, vnprofitable I say for any vse that is
commendable, except to intertaine straũgers with their barcking in the
day time, giuyng warnyng to them of the house, that such & such be newly
come, wherevpon we call them admonishing Dogges, because in that point
they performe theyr office.


Of the Dogge called Turnespete in Latine _Veruuersator_.

There is comprehended, vnder the curres of the coursest kinde, a
certaine dogge in kytchen seruice excellent. For whẽ any meate is to bee
roasted they go into a wheele which they turning rounde about with the
waight of their bodies, so (35) diligently looke to their businesse,
that no drudge nor skullion can doe the feate more cunningly. Whom the
popular sort herevpon call Turnespets, being the last of all those which
wee haue first mencioned.


Of the Dogge called the Daunser, in Latine _Saltator_ or _Tympanista_.

There be also dogges among vs of a mungrell kind which are taught and
exercised to daunce in measure at the musicall sounde of an instrument,
as, at the iust stroke of the drombe, at the sweete accent of the
Cyterne, & tuned strings of the harmonious Harpe showing many pretty
trickes by the gesture of their bodies. As to stand bolte upright, to
lye flat vpon the grounde, to turne rounde as a ringe holding their
tailes in their teeth, to begge for theyr meate, and sundry such
properties, which they learne of theyr vagabundicall masters, whose
instrumentes they are to gather gaine, withall in Citie, Country, Towne,
and Village. As some which carry olde apes on their shoulders in
coloured iackets to moue men to laughter for a litle lucre.


Of other Dogges, a short conclusion, wonderfully ingendred within the
coastes of this country.

Three sortes of them,

    { The first bred of a bytch and a wolfe, } In Latine _Lyciscus_.
    { The second of a bytche and a foxe,     } In Latine _Lacæna_.
    { The third of a beare and a bandogge,   } In Latine _Vrcanus_.

Of the first we haue none naturally bred within the borders of England.
The reason is for the want of wolfes, without whom no such kinde of
Dogge can bee ingendred. Againe (36) it is deliuered vnto thee in this
discourse, how and by what meanes, by whose benefite, and within what
circuite of tyme, this country was cleerely discharged of rauenyng
wolfes, and none at all left, no, not to the least number, or the
beginnyng of a number, which is an _Vnari_.

Of the second sort we are not vtterly voyde of some, because this our
Englishe soyle is not free from foxes (for in deede we are not without a
multitude of them in so much as diuerse keepe, foster, and feede them in
their houses among their houndes and dogges, eyther for some maladie of
mind, or for some sicknesse of body,) which peraduenture the savour of
that subtill beast would eyther mitigate or expell.

The thirde kinde which is bred of a Beare and a Bandogge we want not
heare in England, (A straunge & wonderfull effect, that cruell enimyes
should enter into y^e worke of copulation & bring forth so sauage a
curre.) Undoubtedly it is euen so as we haue reported, for the fyery
heate of theyr fleshe, or rather the pricking thorne, or most of all,
the tyckling lust of lechery, beareth such swinge and sway in them, that
there is no contrairietie for the time, but of constraint they must
ioyne to ingender. And why should not this bee consonant to truth? why
shoulde not these beastes breede in this lande, as well as in other
forreigne nations? For wee reede that Tigers and dogges in _Hircania_,
that Lyons and Dogges in _Arcadia_, and that wolfes and dogges in
_Francia_, couple and procreate. In men and women also lyghtened with
the lantarne of reason (but vtterly voide of vertue) that foolishe,
frantique, and fleshely action, (yet naturally sealed in vs) worketh so
effectuously, y^t many tymes it doth reconcile enimyes, set foes at
freendship, vnanimitie, & atonement, as _Moria_ mencioneth. The _Vrcane_
which is bred of a beare and a dogge,

  Is fearce, is fell, is stoute and stronge,
  And byteth sore to fleshe and bone,
  His furious force indureth longe
  In rage he will be rul’de of none.

That I may vse the wordes of the Poet _Gratius_, This (37) dogge
exceedeth all other in cruell conditions, his leering and fleering
lookes, his stearne and sauage vissage, maketh him in sight feareful and
terrible, he is violent in fighting, & wheresoeuer he setteth his
tenterhooke teeth, he taketh such sure & fast hold that a man may sooner
teare and rende him in sunder, then lose him and seperate his chappes.
He passeth not for the Wolfe, the Beare, the Lyon, nor the Bull, and may
wortherly (as I thinke) be companiõ with _Alexanders_ dogge which came
out of _India_. But of these, thus much, and thus farre may seeme
sufficient.


A starte to outlandishe Dogges in this conclusion, not impertinent to
the Authors purpose.

Vse and custome hath intertained other dogges of an outlandishe kinde,
but a fewe and the same beyng of a pretty bygnesse, I meane Iseland,
dogges curled & rough al ouer, which by reason of the lenght of their
heare make showe neither of face nor of body. And yet these curres,
forsoothe, because they are so straunge are greatly set by, esteemed,
taken vp, and made of many times in the roome of the Spaniell gentle or
comforter. The natures of men is so moued, nay rather marryed to
nouelties without all reason, wyt, iudgement or perseueraunce. Ἐρῶμεν
ἀλλοτριῶν, παρορῶμεν συγγενεῖς.

  Outlandishe toyes we take with delight,
  Things of our owne nation we haue in despight.

Which fault remaineth not in vs concerning dogges only, but for
artificers also. And why? it is to manyfest that wee disdayne and
contempne our owne workmen, be they neuer so skilfull, be they neuer so
cunning, be they neuer so excellent. A beggerly beast brought out of
barbarous borders, frõ the vttermost countryes Northward, &c., we stare
at, we gase at, we muse, we maruaile at, like an asse of _Cumanum_, like
Thales with the brasen shancks, like the man in the Moone.

(38) The which default _Hippocrates_ marcked when he was alyue, as
euidently appeareth in the beginnyng of his booke περὶ ἀγμῶν, so
intituled and named:

And we in our worcke entituled _De Ephemera Britanica_, to the people of
England haue more plentifully expressed. In this kinde looke which is
most blockishe, and yet most waspishe, the same is most esteemed, and
not amonge Citizens onely and iolly gentlemen, but among lustie Lordes
also, and noble men, and daintie courtier ruffling in their ryotous
ragges. Further I am not to wade in the foorde of this discourse,
because it was my purpose to satisfie your expectation with a short
treatise (most learned _Conrade_) not wearysome for me to wryte, nor
tedious for you to peruse. Among other things which you haue receaued at
my handes heretofore, I remember that I wrote a seuerall description of
the Getulian Dogge, because there are but a fewe of them and therefore
very seldome scene. As touching Dogges of other kyndes you your selfe
haue taken earnest paine, in writing of them both lyuely, learnedly and
largely. But because wee haue drawne this libell more at length then the
former which I sent you (and yet briefer than the nature of the thing
myght well beare) regardyng your more earnest and necessary studdies. I
will conclude makyng a rehearsall notwithstanding (for memoryes sake) of
certaine specialties contayned in the whole body of this my breuiary.
And because you participate principall pleasure in the knowledge of the
common and vsuall names of Dogges (as I gather by the course of your
letters) I suppose it not amysse to deliuer vnto you a shorte table
contayning as well the Latine as the Englishe names, and to render a
reason of euery particular appellation, to th’intent that no scruple may
remaine in this point, but that euery thing may bee sifted to the bare
bottome.


  A Diall pertaining to the
  _fifte Section_.

  Dogges contained in this last Diall or Table are

  { The wapp or warner,
  { The Turnespet,
  { The dauncer,

  called in Latine _Canes Rustici_




  A Supplement or Addition, containing
  a demonstration of Dogges
  names how they had their
  Originall.


The names contayned in the generall table, for so much as they signifie
nothing to you being a straunger, and ignoraunt of the Englishe tounge,
except they be interpreted: As we haue giuen a reason before of y^e
latine words so meane we to doe no lesse of the Englishe that euery
thing maye be manyfest vnto your vnderstanding. Wherein I intende to
obserue the same order which I haue followed before.


The names of such Dogges as be contained in the first section.

_Sagax_, in Englishe Hunde, is deriued of our English word (40) hunte.
One letter chaunged in another, namely, T, into D, as Hunt, Hunde, whom
(if you coniecture to be so named of your country worde _Hunde_ which
signifieth the generall name Dogge, because of the similitude and
likenesse of the wordes I will not stand in contradiction (friende
_Gesner_) for so much as we retaine among vs at this day many Dutche
wordes which the _Saxons_ left at such time as they occupyed this
country of Britane. Thus much also vnderstand, that as in your language
_Hunde_ is the common word, so in our naturall tounge dogge is the
vniuersall, but _Hunde_ is perticuler and a speciall, for it signifieth
such a dogge onely as serueth to hunt, and therfore it is called a
hunde.


Of the Gasehounde.

The Gasehounde called in latine _Agasæus_, hath his name of the
sharpenesse and stedfastnesse of his eyesight. By which vertue he
compasseth that which otherwise he cannot by smelling attaine. As we
haue made former relation, for to gase is earnestly to viewe and
beholde, from whence floweth the deriuation of this dogges name.


Of the Grehounde.

The Grehounde called _Leporarius_, hath his name of this word, Gre,
which word soundeth, _Gradus_ in latine, in Englishe degree. Because
among all dogges these are the most principall, occupying the chiefest
place, and being simply and absolutely the best of the gentle kinde of
houndes.


Of the Leuyner or the Lyemmer.

This dogge is called a Leuyner, for his lyghtnesse, which in latine
soundeth _Leuitas_, Or a Lyemmer which worde is borrowed of Lyemme,
which the latinists name _Lorum_: and wherefore we call him a Leuyner of
this worde _Leuitas_? (as we doe many things besides) why we deriue and
drawe a thousand of our tearmes, out of the _Greeke_, the _Latine_, the
_Italian_, the _Dutch_, the _French_, and the _Spanishe_ tounge? (Out of
which fountaines in deede, they had their originall issue.) How many
words are buryed in the graue of forgetfulnes? growne out of vse?
wrested awrye? and peruersly corrupted by diuers (41) defaultes? we wil
declare at large in our booke intituled, _Symphonia vocum
Britannicarum_.


Of the Tumbler.

Among houndes the Tumbler called in latine _Vertagus_, is the last,
which commeth of this worde Tumbler flowyng first of al out of the
French fountaine. For as we say Tumble so they, _Tumbier_, reseruing one
sense and signification, which the latinists comprehende vnder this
worde _Vertere_, So that we see thus much, that Tumbler commeth of
_Tumbier_, the vowell, I, chaunged into the _Liquid_, L, after y^e maner
of our speache. Contrary to the French and the Italian tounge. In which
two languages, A _Liquid_ before a _Vowell_ for the most part is turned
into another _Vowell_, As, may be perceaued in the example of these two
wordes, _Implere_ & _plano_, for _Impiere_ & _piano_, L, before, E,
chaunged into, I, and L, before A, turned into I, also. This I thought
conuenient for a taste.


The names of such Dogges as be contained in the second Section.

After such as serue for hunting orderly doe follow such as serue for
hawking and fowling, Among which the principall and chiefest is the
Spaniell, called in Latine _Hispaniolus_, borrowing his name of
_Hispania_ Spaine, wherein wee Englishe men not pronouncing the
Aspiration H, Nor the _Vowell_ I, for quicknesse and redinesse of speach
say roundly A Spaniell.


Of the Setter.

The second sort of this second diuision and second section, is called a
Setter, in latine _Index_, Of the worde Set which signifieth in Englishe
that which the Latinistes meane by this word _Locum designare_, y^e
reason is rehersed before more largely, it shall not neede to make a new
repetition.


(42) Of the water Spaniell or Finder.

The water Spaniell consequently followeth, called in Latine Aquaticus,
in English a waterspaniell, which name is compounde of two simple
wordes, namely Water, which in Latine soũdeth _Aqua_, wherein he
swymmeth. And _Spaine_, _Hispania_, the country frõ whence they came,
Not that England wanted such kinde of Dogges, (for they are naturally
bred and ingendred in this country.) But because they beare the generall
and common name of these Dogges synce the time they were first brought
ouer out of Spaine. And wee make a certaine difference in this sort of
Dogges, eyther for some thing which in theyr voyce is to be marked, or
for some thing which in their qualities is to be considered, as for an
example in this kinde called the Spaniell by the apposition and putting
to of this word water, which two coupled together sounde waterspaniell.
He is also called a fynder, in Latine _Inquisitor_, because that by
serious and secure seeking, he findeth such things as be lost, which
word _Finde_ in English is that which the Latines meane by this Verbe
_Inuenire_. This dogge hath this name of his property because the
principall point of his seruice consisteth in the premisses.


The names of such Dogges as be contained in the thirde Section.

Now leauing the suruie we of hunting and hauking dogs, it remaineth that
we runne ouer the residue, whereof some be called, fine dogs, some
course, other some mungrels or rascalls. The first is the Spaniell
gentle called _Canis Melitæus_, because it is a kinde of dogge accepted
among gentles, Nobles, Lordes, Ladies, &c. who make much of them
vouchsafeing to admit them so farre into their company that they will
not onely lull them in theyr lappes, but kysse them with their lippes,
and make them theyr prettie playfellowes. Such a one was _Gorgons_ litle
puppie mencioned by _Theocritus_ in _Siracusis_, (43) who taking his
iourney, straightly charged & commaunded his mayde to see to his Dogge
as charely and warely as to his childe: To call him in alwayes that he
wandred not abroade, as well as to rock the babe a sleepe, crying in the
cradle. This puppitly and peasantly curre, (which some frumpingly tearme
fysteing hounds) serue in a maner to no good vse except, (As we haue
made former relation) to succour and strengthen quailing and quammning
stomackes to bewray bawdery, and filthy abhominable leudnesse (which a
litle dogge of this kinde did in _Sicilia_) As _Ælianus_ in his .7.
booke of beastes and .27. chapter recordeth.


The names of such dogges as be contained in the fourth Section.

Of dogges vnder the courser kinde, wee will deale first with the
shepherds dogge, whom we call the Bandogge, the Tydogge, or the Mastyue,
the first name is imputed to him for seruice _Quoniam pastori
famulatur_, because he is at the shepherds his masters commaundement.
The seconde a _Ligamento_ of the band or chaine wherewith he is tyed,
The thirde a _Sagina_, Of the fatnesse of his body.

For this kinde of dogge which is vsually tyed, is myghty, grosse, and
fat fed. I know this that _Augustinus Niphus_, calleth this _Mastinus_
(which we call Mastiuus.) And that _Albertus_ writeth how the _Lyciscus_
is ingendred by a beare and a wolfe. Notwithstanding the self same
Author taketh it for the most part _pro Molosso_. A dogge of such a
countrey.


The names of such dogges as be contained in the fifte Section.

Of mungrels and rascalls somwhat is to be spoken. And among these, of
y^e _VVappe_ or _Turnespet_, which name is made of two simple words,
that is, of _Turne_, which in latine soundeth _Vertere_, and of _spete_
which is _Veru_, or _spede_, for the Englishe word inclineth closer to
the Italian imitation: _Veruuersator_, Turnspet. He is called also
VVaupe, of the naturall noise of (44) his voyce _VV_au, which he maketh
in barcking. But for the better and the redyer sounde, the vowell, u, is
chaunged into the cõsonant, p, so y^t for waupe we say wappe. And yet I
wot well that _Nonius_ boroweth his _Baubari_ of the natural voyce
_Bau_, as the _Græcians_ doe their βάυζειν of wau.

Now when you vnderstand this that _Saltare_ in latine signifieth
_Dansare_ in Englishe. And that our dogge therevpon is called a daunser
and in the latine _Saltator_, you are so farre taught as you were
desirous to learne, And now suppose I, there remaineth nothing, but that
your request is fully accomplished.


The winding vp of this worke, called the Supplement, &c.

Thus (Friend _Gesner_) you haue, not only the kindes of our countrey
dogges, but their names also, as well in latine as in Englishe, their
offices, seruices, diuersities, natures, & properties, that you can
demaunde no more of me in this matter. And albeit I haue not satisfied
your minde peraduẽture (who suspectest al speede in the performaunce of
your requeste employed, to be meere delayes) because I stayde the
setting fourth of that vnperfect pamphlet which, fiue yeares ago, I sent
to you as a priuate friende for your owne reeding, and not to be
printed, and so made common, yet I hope (hauing like the beare lickt
ouer my younge) I haue waded in this worke to your contentation, which
delay hath made somewhat better and δευτέραι φροντίδες, after witte more
meete to be perused.


The ende of this treatise.

FINIS.




[Decoration]

  _An Alphabetical Index, declaring the_
  whole discourse of this abridgement. The number importeth the Page.


  _A._

  Abridgement of Dogges.                                       1
  Abstinence from lost goods.                                 27
  Aelianus his opinion of bloodhoundes.                        6
  Aelianus and Aelius, opinion of the beauer.                 19
  Alfredus maintained iustice.                                27
  An example of rebellion, and the reward of the same.        26
  An example of loue in a dogge.                              31
  Arcadian dogge.                                             36

  _B._

  Bandogges bayte the Beare and the Bull.                     25
  Blondus opinion of a dogge.                                 30
  Blooddy and butcherlye curres.                              32
  Beauer called a water dogge.                                19
  Beauer wherein hee is lyke a dogge.                         19
  Beasts preuented of succor.                                  5
  Bloodhoundes howe they are knowne.                           5
  Bloodhounds conditions in hũting.                       ibidem
  Bloodhounds whence they borrowe their names.              ibid.
  Bloodhoundes pursue without wearinesse.                      6
  Bloodhoundes discerne theeues from true men.                 6
  Bloodhoundes hunte by water and by land.                  ibid.
  Bloodhoundes when they cease from hunting.              ibidem
  Bloodhoundes why they are kept close in the daye,
      and let lose in the night.                           ibide.
  Bloodhounds haue not lybertye alwayes
      to raunge at wyll.                                       7
  Bloodhoundes are their maisters guides.                   ibid.
  Borders of England pestred with pylferers.              ibidem
  Bloodhounds why they are vsed in England
      and Scotland.                                          ibi.
  Bloodhoundes take not the water naturally.              ibidem
  Bloodhoundes called Brache in Scottishe.                ibidem
  Bloodhounds when they barck.                                 8
  Butchers dogge.                                             28
  Butchers dogge why so called.                            ibide.

  _C._

  Caius booke of dogges twyse written.                         1
  Conny is not hunted.                                         4
  Connye caught with the ferryt.                          ibidem
  Conny taken with the net.                                  ibi.
  Continuaunce of tyme breedeth cunning.                       8
  Castle of Flint.                                            10
  Cunnies preuented of succor.                                11
  Callimachus.                                                20
  Cõforter called Meliteus.                                 ibid.
  Comforters proportion described.                         ibide.
  Comforters condicions declared.                         ibidem
  Comforters to what ende they serue.                     ibidem
  Comforters the pretier, the pleasaunter.                    21
  Comforters, companions of ydle dames.                   ibidem
  Comforters why they are so much estemed
      among gentlefolkes.                                 ibidem
  Comforters, what vertue is in them.                      ibide.
  Conditions natural, som secrete, some manifest.          ibide.
  Comforters called by sundrye names.                      ibide.
  Cicero pro S. Ross.                                         26
  Countrey cotages annoyed with theeues.                  ibidem
  Capitolium kept dogges at the common charge.             ibide.
  Carrier why he is so called.                                28
  Carriers seruice and properties.                        ibidem
  Comeparcke, a perillous place.                              30
  Cõmendation of the mastiue.                                 32

  _D._

  Dogges for hunting two kindes generally.                     2
  Diuerse dogges diuerse vses.                                 4
  Deceipt is th’ instrument of the Tumbler.                   12
  Dogges for the faulcon, the phesaunt,
      and the partridge.                                      15
  Dogs are houshold seruants.                                 16
  Ducks deceaue both dogge and maister.                       17
  Ducks subtyle of nature.                                   ibi.
  Ducks dissẽble weaknesse.                                  ibi.
  Ducks prudent and prouident.                            ibidem
  Ducks regarde them selues and their broode.               ibid.
  Dogges of a course kind.                                   ibi.
  Dissembling theeues.                                        27
  Dissembling dogges.                                         30
  Defending dogges stick to their maisters
      to the death.                                        ibide.
  Defending dogges greedy of reuengement.                 ibidem
  Diuersitie of mastiues.                                     32
  Daungerous dogges.                                        ibid.
  Daunsers qualities.                                         35
  Daunsers begge for their meate.                         ibidem
  Daunsers vsed for lucre and gaine.                        ibid.
  Dogges wonderfullye ingendred.                          ibidem

  _E._

  England is not without Scottish dogges.                      2
  Election in a gase hound.                                    8
  England and VVales are cleare from wolues.                  24
  Edgar what tyme King of England.                        ibidem
  Epirus a countrey in Græcia.                                28

  _F._

  Foxe hunted by the gasehound.                                8
  Flight preuenteth peryl.                                     9
  Froisart historiographer.                                   10
  Flint Castle.                                            ibide.
  Fiench dogges howe their skins be speckled.                 15
  Fisher dogge none in Englande.                              18
  Fisher dogge, doubtfull if there be any such.           ibidem
  Faulcon and an Eagle fight.                                 26
  Faulcon kylled for fighting with an Eagle.                ibid.
  Fire betraied by a dogge.                                   30
  Fire raked vp by a dogge.                                   31
  Farmars keepe dogges.                                     ibid.
  Feareful dogges barke sorest.                               32
  Foxes kept for sundrye causes.                              36
  Foxes holsome in houses.                                  ibid.

  _G._

  Gesner desirous of knowledge.                                1
  Gesner earnest in experimentes.                            ibi.
  Gasehounde whence he hath his name.                          9
  Gasehoundes vsed in the North.                          ibidem
  Gasehound somtimes loseth his waye.                     ibidem
  Grehound light footed.                                    ibid.
  Grehounds special seruice.                                 ibi.
  Grehoundes strong and swifte.                           ibidem
  Grehounds game.                                             10
  Grehounds spare of body.                                   ibi.
  Grehounds nature wonderfull.                              ibid.
  Grehounde of King Richarde.                               ibid.
  Gentle dogge.                                               14
  Gratius Poet his opinion.                                   37
  Getulian dogge.                                             38

  _H._

  Hunting wherin it consisteth.                                2
  Hunting and fowleing doo differ.                             3
  Hunting dogges, fiue speciall kinds.                      ibid.
  Harryer excelleth in smelling.                          ibidem
  Harryer how he is known.                                   ibi.
  Hare hunted by the gasehound.                                8
  Henry Duke of Lancaster.                                    10
  Hole of the Conny, their hauen of health.                   11
  Hare daunsing in measure.                                   16
  Hare beating and thumping a dogge.                      ibidem
  Heare a hinderaunce to the water Spaniell
      in swymming.                                            17
  Heare an vnprofitable burthen.                             ibi.
  Hector Boethus.                                             18
  Henry the seuenth.                                          26
  Henries commaundement to hang all bandogges.              ibid.
  Henries Faulconer, and his Faulcon.                        ibi.
  Hippocrates.                                                38

  _I._

  Justice mayntained by Alfred.                               27
  Ingulphus Croyladensis historiographer.                     28
  Ianus watching.                                             31
  Indian dogges.                                              37
  Iseland curres, rough and rugged.                         ibid.
  Iselande curres mutch sette by.                         ibidem

  _K._

  King Richarde of England.                                   10
  King Edgars trybute out of VVales.                          23
  King Henrie the seuenth.                                    26
  King of all beasts, the Lyon.                              ibi.
  King of all Birds, the Eagle.                              ibi.
  Keepers seruice.                                            28
  Kingston, or Kingstoune verye famous in olde time.          30
  Kinges crowned at Kingstoune, to the number of eyght,
      theyr names are these. Edward the first, Athelstan,
      Edmunde, Aldred, Edwin, Edgar, Edeldred, Edwarde,
      syrnamed Yron rybbes.                                 ibid.

  _L._

  Leuiner quicke of smelling, and swyft of running.           10
  Leuiner, why so called.                                    ibi.
  Leuiner foloweth the game eagerly.                         ibi.
  Leuiner taketh his pray speedilie.                        ibid.
  Lyon King of all beasts.                                    26
  Lust of the flesh reconcileth enemies.                      36

  _M._

  Maisters becke a direction to the gasehound.                 9
  Melita or Malta.                                            20
  Mastiues proportiõ described.                               20
  Mastiue, why he is called Villaticus.                      ibi.
  Mastiues vse and seruice.                                  ibi.
  Mastiues are mankind.                                      ibi.
  Mastiues of great might.                                    16
  Molossia.                                                   28
  Mooner, why so termed.                                      29
  Mooner watchfull.                                          ibi.
  Mungrellesl.                                               [34]
  Maisterles men carrie Apes about.                           35
  Man in the moone.                                           37

  _N._

  Nature hath made some dogges for hunting.                    4
  Naturall properties of the water spaniel.                   16
  No VVolues in Englande nor VVales.                          24
  No place free from theeues.                                 27
  Nothing escapeth the spoiler.                               18
  Nonius bau wau.                                             19
  Names of the mastiue.                                       33
  Names of the spaniel gentle.                                22
  Names of Dogges whence they were deriued.   39, 40, 41, 42, &c.

  _O._

  One Dogge hunteth diuerse beastes.                           4
  Owners of bloudhoundes howe they vse them.                   6
  Order of the Tumbler in hunting.                            11
  Of the Cumaneasse.                                          37
  Of brasen shanckt Thales.                                  ibi.
  Otter.                                                       7

  _P._

  Properties of a bloudhound issuing from desire.              7
  Proportion and making of the water spaniel.                 17
  Pupine a byrd and a fyshe.                                  18
  Princes pallace pestered with theeues.                      16
  Paris in Fraunce.                                           30

  _R._

  Rome maintained dogges.                                     28
  Rare toyes meete for Englishemen.                           37

  _S._

  Smelling is not incident to the gasehound.                   8
  Spaniels of a gentle kinde.                                 14
  Spaniels two sortes.                                     ibide.
  Spaniel of the lande what properties.                   ibidem
  Spaniel for the hauke and the nette.                     ibide.
  Spaniels some haue speciall names.                       ibide.
  Spaniel a name vniuersall.                                  15
  Spaniels the colour of their skinnes.                   ibidem
  Setters make no noyse, or very litle, in their game.    ibidem
  Setters giue attendaunce.                                ibide.
  Setters behauiour.                                       ibide.
  Setter whence he hath his name.                             16
  Sea calfe not numbred amonge Englishe dogges.               19
  Sea calfe called a dogge fishe.                            ibi.
  Seele or sea veale.                                     ibidem
  Spaniell gentle or the comforter.                           20
  Shepherdes dogge.                                           23.
    The necessity of their seruice.                          ibi.
    The proportion of them.                               ibidem
  Shepherdes what benefite they reape by their dogges.        24
  Sheepherdes in what countryes they go
      before their sheepe.                                ibidem
  Sheepe howe they flocke at the sheepherds whistle.        ibid.
  Sheepherds Dogge choose and take.                         ibid.
  Salacones vaineglorious.                                    37

  _T._

  Terrars hunt the badger and the Foxe.                        4
  Terrars hunt as ferryts hunt.                              ibi.
  Terrars conditions.                                       ibid.
  Terrars holde fast with theyr teeth.                         5
  Tumblers crafty and fraudulent.                             11
  Tumblers why so named.                                    ibid.
    their trade in hũting.                                   ibi.
    their dissembling of friendship.                         ibi.
    they hunt against the wind.                               12
  Theeuish dogges.                                        ibidem
  Theeuish Dogge, a night curre.                          ibidem
  Theeues feare no law,                                       27.
    Some steale for neede.                                  ibid.
    Some to maintaine brauery.                               ibi.
  Tynckers curres beare burthens 29.
    their conditions.                                        ibi.
    they loue their masters.                                ibid.
  Two suiters to one woman.                                   30
  Turnespet painefull in the kytchen.                         34
  Thales with the brasen feete.                               37

  _V._

  Vertue of the comforter.                                    21
  Valentines law for vagabundes.                              27
  Virgils vearse.                                             31

  _W._

  VVatchwordes make Dogges perfect in game.                    8
  VVonder of a Hare or Leuerit.                               16
  VVater spaniell called the finder.                      ibidem
  VVater spaniels what properties.                        ibidem.
  VVater spaniels their proportion.                           17.
    howe they be described by _D. Caius_.                 ibidem
  VVhy so called.                                         ibidem
  VVhere their game lyeth and what it is.                 ibidem
  VVhy they are called fynders.                           ibidem
  VVanton women, wanton puppies.                              20
  VVolues bloudsucking beastes.                               23.
    none England nor wales.                               ibidem.
    three hundred payde yearely to Prince Edgar.            ibid.
  VVarner what seruice he doth.                               34
  VVappes vnprofitable dogges.                            ibidem

  _Y._

  Young dogges barcke much.                                    8
  Yolping and yelling in a bandogge.                          31
  Yll kinde whelpes not regarded.                             33


_The ende of the Index._




  ¶ Faultes escaped
  _thus to b’amended_.

  In the last page of the Epistle Dedicatory, _Quæ_ for _Qui_
  Page. 3. _Grecians_ for _Græcians_,
  Page. 28. _Canis Cultos_ for _Canis Custos_,
  Page. 38. _Britanica_ for _Britannica_.

Other faultes we referre to the correction of the Reader.

There bee also certaine _Accents_ wanting in the Greeke words which,
because we had them not, are pretermitted: so haue wee byn fayne to let
the Greeke words run their full length, for lacke of _Abbreuiations_.


_Studio & industriæ,_

  _Abrahami_
  _Flemingi._


CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.